XIV. The Atlanta Exposition Address.
The Atlanta Exposition, at which I had been asked to make an address as a representative
of the Negro race, as stated in the last chapter, was opened with a short address from Governor Bullock.
After other interesting exercises, including an invocation from Bishop Nelson of Georgia,
a dedicatory owed by Albert Howell, Jr., and addresses by the President of the Exposition,
and Mrs. Joseph Thompson, the President of the Woman's Board, Governor Bullock introduced me
with the words, We have with us today a representative of Negro enterprise and Negro civilization.
When I arose to speak there was considerable cheering, especially from the colored people.
As I remember it now, the thing that was uppermost in my mind was the desire to say something that
would cement the friendship of the races and bring about hearty cooperation between them.
So far as my outward surroundings were concerned, the only thing that I recall distinctly now
is that when I got up I saw thousands of eyes looking intently into my face.
The following is the address which I delivered.
Mr. President, and gentlemen of the Board of Directors and Citizens,
one third of the population of the South is of the Negro race.
No enterprise seeking the material, civil, or moral welfare of this section can disregard
this element of our population and reach the highest success.
I but convey to you, Mr. President and Directors, the sentiment of the masses of my race when I say
that in no way have the value and manhood of the American Negro been more fittingly and generously
recognized than by the managers of this magnificent exposition at every stage of its progress.
It is a recognition that will do more to cement the friendship of the two races
than any occurrence since the dawn of our freedom.
Not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a new era of industrial
progress. Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not strange that in the first years of our new life
we began at the top instead of at the bottom, that a seat in Congress or the State Legislature
was more sought than real estate or industrial skill, that the political convention or stump
speaking had more attractions than starting a dairy farm or a truck garden.
A ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel.
From the mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal,
Water, water, we die of thirst. The answer from the friendly vessel at once came back,
Cast down your bucket where you are. A second time the signal,
Water, water, send us water, ran up from the distressed vessel and was answered,
Cast down your bucket where you are. And a third and fourth signal for water was answered,
Cast down your bucket where you are. The captain of the distressed vessel,
at last heeding the injunction, cast down his bucket and it came up full of fresh,
sparkling water from the mouth of the Amazon River. To those of my race who depend on
their condition in a foreign land, or who underestimate the importance of cultivating
friendly relations with a southern white man, who is their next door neighbour, I would say,
Cast down your bucket where you are. Cast it down in making friends in every manly way,
of the people of all races by whom we are surrounded. Cast it down in agriculture,
mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service and in the professions. And in this connection it is
well to bear in mind that whatever other sins the South may be called to bear, when it comes to
pure and simple business, it is in the South that the Negro is given a man's chance in the
commercial world, and in nothing is this exposition more eloquent than in emphasising this chance.
Our greatest danger is that, in the great leap from slavery to freedom, we may overlook the fact
that the masses of us are to live by the production of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we
shall prosper in proportion as we learn to dignify and glorify common labour, and put brains and
skill into the common occupations of life, shall prosper in proportion as we learn to draw the
line between the superficial and the substantial, the ornamental gougas of life and the useful.
No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing
a poem. It is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top, nor should we permit our
grievances to overshadow our opportunities. To those of the white race who look to the
those of foreign birth and strange tongue and habits of the prosperity of the South,
were I permitted, I would repeat what I say to my own race. Cast down your bucket where you are.
Cast it down among the eight millions of Negroes whose habits you know, whose fidelity and love
you have tested in days when to have proved treacherous meant the ruin of your firesides.
Cast down your bucket among these people who have, without strikes and labour wars,
tilled your fields, cleared your forests, built your railroads and cities, and brought forth
treasures from the bowels of the earth, and helped make possible this magnificent representation of
the progress of the South. Casting down your bucket among my people, helping and encouraging
them as you are doing on these grounds, and to education of head, hand, and heart, you will find
that they will buy your surplus land, make blossom the waste places in your fields, and run your
factories. While doing this, you can be sure in the future, as in the past, that you and your
families will be surrounded by the most patient, faithful, law-abiding, and unresentful people that
the world has seen. As we have proved our loyalty to you in the past, nursing your children,
watching by the sick bed of your mothers and fathers, and often following them with tear-dimmed
eyes to their graves, so in the future, in our humble way, we shall stand by you with a devotion
that no foreigner can approach, ready to lay down our lives if need be in defense of yours,
interlacing our industrial, commercial, civil, and religious life with yours in a way that
shall make the interests of both races one. In all things that are purely social, we can be
as separate as the fingers, yet one is the hand in all things essential to mutual progress.
There is no defense or security for any of us, except in the highest intelligence and development
of all. If anywhere there are efforts tending to curtail the fullest growth of the negro,
let these efforts be turned into stimulating, encouraging, and making him the most useful
and intelligent citizen. Efforts or means so invested will pay a thousand percent interest.
These efforts will be twice blessed, blessing him that gives and him that takes.
There is no escape through law of man or God from the inevitable.
The laws of changeless justice bind, oppressor with oppressed,
and close as sin and suffering joined, we march to fate abreast.
Nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load upward,
or they will pull against you the load downward. We shall constitute one-third and more of the
ignorance and crime of the South, or one-third its intelligence and progress. We shall contribute
one-third to the business and industrial prosperity of the South, or we shall prove a veritable body
of death, stagnating, depressing, retarding every effort to advance the body politic.
Gentlemen of the Exposition, as we present you our humble effort at an exhibition of our progress,
you must not expect over much. Starting thirty years ago with ownership here and there in a
few quilts and pumpkins and chickens gathered from miscellaneous sources, remember the path that has
led from these to the inventions and production of agricultural implements, buggies, steam engines,
newspapers, books, statuary, carving, paintings, the management of drug stores and banks,
has not been trodden without contact with thorns and thistles. While we take pride in what we
exhibit as a result of our independent efforts, we do not for a moment forget that our part in
this exhibition would fall far short of your expectations but for the constant help that has
come to our education life, not only from the Southern States but especially from Northern
philanthropists who have made their gifts a constant stream of blessing and encouragement.
The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is
extremist folly, and that progress and the enjoyment of all the privileges that will come
to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing.
No race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree
ostracized. It is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly
more important that we be prepared for the exercises of these privileges. The opportunity
to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a
dollar in an opera house. In conclusion, may I repeat that nothing in thirty years has given
us more hope and encouragement, and drawn us so near to you of the white race, as this opportunity
offered by the exposition, and here bending, as it were, over the altar that represents the
results of the struggles of your race and mine, both starting practically empty-handed three
decades ago, I pledge that in your effort to work out the great and intricate problem which
God has laid at the doors of the South, you shall have at all times the patient, sympathetic help
of my race. Only let this be constantly in mind, that while from the representations in these
buildings of the product of field, of forest, of mine, of factory, letters, and art, much good
will come, yet far above and beyond material benefits will be that higher good, that, let us
be in a determination to administer absolute justice in a willing obedience among all classes
to the mandates of law. This, coupled with our material prosperity, will bring into our beloved
South a new heaven and a new earth. The first thing that I remember after I had finished speaking
was that Governor Bullock rushed across the platform and took me by the hand and that others
did the same. I received so many and such hearty congratulations that I found it difficult to get
out of the building. I did not appreciate to any degree, however, the impression which my address
seemed to have made until the next morning when I went into the business part of the city. As soon
as I was recognized I was surprised to find myself pointed out and surrounded by a crowd of men who
wished to shake hands with me. This was kept up on every street onto which I went, to an extent
which embarrassed me so much that I went back to my boarding place. The next morning I returned
to Tuskegee. At the station in Atlanta and at almost all of the stations at which the trains
stopped between that city and Tuskegee I found a crowd of people anxious to shake hands with me.
The papers in all parts of the United States published the address in full and for months
afterwards there were complementary editorial references to it. Mr. Carr Cowell, the editor
of the Atlanta Constitution, telegraphed to a New York paper among other words the following.
I do not exaggerate when I say that Professor Booker T. Washington's address yesterday was one
of the most notable speeches, both as to character and as to the warmth of its reception,
ever delivered to a southern audience. The address was a revelation. The whole speech
is a platform upon which blacks and whites can stand with full justice to each other.
The Boston transcript said editorially,
The speech of Booker T. Washington at the Atlanta Exposition this week seems to have
dwarfed all other proceedings and the Exposition itself. The sensation that
it has caused in the press has never been equaled.
I very soon began receiving all kinds of propositions from lecture bureaus and editors
of magazines and papers to take the lecture platform and to write articles. One lecture
bureau offered me $50,000 or $200 a night in expenses if I would place my services at its
disposal for a given period. To all these communications I replied that my life work
was at Tuskegee and that whenever I spoke it must be in the interests of Tuskegee School and my race
and that I would enter into no arrangements that seemed to place a mere commercial value
upon my services. Some days after its delivery I sent a copy of my address to the President
of the United States, the Honorable Grover Cleveland. I received from him the following
autograph reply.
Greg Abels, Buzzards Bay, Massachusetts October 6, 1895
Booker T. Washington, Esquire
My dear sir, I thank you for sending me a copy of your address delivered at the Atlanta Exposition.
I thank you with much enthusiasm for making the address. I have read it with intense interest
and I think the Exposition would be fully justified if it did not do more than furnish
the opportunity for its delivery. Your words cannot fail to delight and encourage all who wish well
for your race, and if our colored fellow citizens do not from your utterances gather new hope and
form new determinations to gain every valuable advantage offered them by their citizenship,
it will be strange indeed. Yours very truly, Grover Cleveland
Later I met Mr. Cleveland for the first time when, as President, he visited the Atlanta Exposition.
At the request of myself and others he consented to spend an hour in the Negro building for the
purpose of inspecting the Negro exhibit and of giving the colored people in attendance an
opportunity to shake hands with him. As soon as I met Mr. Cleveland I became impressed with his
simplicity, greatness, and rugged honesty. I have met him many times since then, both at public
functions and at his private residence in Princeton, and the more I see of him the more I admire him.
When he visited the Negro building in Atlanta he seemed to give himself up wholly, for that hour,
to the colored people. He seemed to be as careful to shake hands with some old colored auntie,
clad partially in rags, and to take as much pleasure in doing so as if he were greeting
some millionaire. Many of the colored people took advantage of the occasion to get him to write his
name in a book or on a slip of paper. He was as careful and patient in doing this as if he
were putting his signature to some great state document. Mr. Cleveland has not only shown his
friendship for me in many personal ways, but has always consented to do anything I have asked of
him for our school. This he has done, whether it was to make a personal donation or to use his
influence in securing the donations of others. Judging from my personal acquaintance with Mr.
Cleveland I do not believe that he is conscious of possessing any color prejudice. He is too great
for that. In my contact with people I find that, as a rule, it is only the little and narrow people
who live for themselves, who never read good books, who do not travel, who never open up their souls
in a way to permit them to come into contact with other souls with the great outside world.
No man whose vision is bounded by color can come into contact with what is highest and best in the
world. In meeting men in many places I have found that the happiest people are those who do the most
for others. The most miserable are those who do the least. I have also found that few things,
if any, are capable of making one so blind and narrow as race prejudice. I have often said to
our students in the course of my talks to them on Sunday evenings in the chapel that the longer I
live and the more experience I have of the world, the more I am convinced that, after all, the one
thing that is most worth living for, and dying for if need be, is the opportunity of making someone
else more happy and more useful. The colored people and the colored newspapers at first seemed
to be greatly pleased with the character of my Atlanta address as well as with its reception,
but after the first burst of enthusiasm began to die away and the colored people began reading the
speech in cold type, some of them seemed to feel that they had been hypnotized. They seemed to feel
that I had been too liberal in my remarks toward the Southern whites and that I had not spoken out
strongly enough for what they termed the rights of my race. For a while there was reaction, so far as
a certain element of my own race was concerned, but later these reactionary ones seemed to have
been won over to my way of believing and acting. While speaking of changes in public sentiment,
I recall that about ten years after the school at Tuskegee was established I had an experience
that I shall never forget. Dr. Lyman Abbott, then the pastor of Plymouth Church and also editor of
The Outlook, then the Christian Union, asked me to write a letter for his paper giving my opinion of
the exact condition, mental and moral, of the colored ministers in the South as based upon my
observations. I wrote the letter giving the exact facts as I conceived them to be. The picture
painted was a rather black one, or since I am black shall I say white. It could not be otherwise
with a race but a few years out of slavery, a race which had not had time or opportunity to produce
a competent ministry. What I said soon reached every Negro ministry in the country, I think,
and the letters of condemnation which I received from them were not few. I think that for a year
after the publication of this article every association and every conference or religious
of any kind of my race that met did not fail before adjourning to pass a resolution condemning
me or calling upon me to retract or modify what I had said. Many of these organizations went so far
in their resolutions as to advise parents to cease sending their children to Tuskegee.
One association even appointed a missionary whose duty it was to warn the people against sending
their children to Tuskegee. This missionary had a son in the school and I noticed that whatever
the missionary might have said or done with regard to others he was careful not to take his
son away from the institution. Many of the colored papers, especially those that were the organs of
religious bodies, joined in the general course of condemnation and demands for retraction.
During the whole time of the excitement and through all the criticism I did not utter a
word of explanation or retraction. I knew that I was right and that time and the sober second
thought of the people would vindicate me. It was not long before the bishops and other church
leaders began to make careful investigation of the conditions of the ministry and they found out
that I was right. In fact the oldest and most influential bishop in one branch of the Methodist
Church said that my words were far too mild. Very soon public sentiment began making itself felt
in demanding a purifying of the ministry. While this is not yet complete by any means,
I think I may say without egotism, and I have been told by many of our most influential ministers,
that my words had much to do with starting a demand for the placing of a higher type of men
in the pulpit. I have had the satisfaction of having many who once condemned me thank me
heartily for my frank words. The change of the attitude of the Negro ministry, so far as regards
myself, is so complete that at the present time I have no warmer friends among any class than I
have among the clergymen. The improvement in the character and life of the Negro ministers is one
of the most gratifying evidences of the progress of the race. My experience with them, as well as
other events in my life, convinced me that the thing to do, and one feels sure that he has said
or done the right thing, and is condemned, is to stand still and keep quiet. If he is right,
time will show it. In the midst of the discussion which was going on concerning my Atlanta speech,
I received the letter which I give below from Dr. Gilman, the President of Johns Hopkins
University, who had been made Chairman of the Judges of Award in connection with the Atlanta
Exposition. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore. President's Office, September 30, 1895.
Dear Mr. Washington, Would it be agreeable to you to be one of the Judges of Award in
the Department of Education at Atlanta? If so, I shall be glad to place your name upon the list.
A line by Telegraph will be welcomed. Yours very truly, D.C. Gilman.
I think I was even more surprised to receive this invitation than I had been to receive
the invitation to speak at the opening of the exposition. It was to be part of my duty as one
of the jurors to pass not only upon the exhibits of the colored schools, but also upon those of
the white schools. I accepted the position and spent a month in Atlanta in performance
of the duties which it entailed. The Board of Jurors was a large one, containing in all of
sixty members. It was about equally divided between Southern white people and Northern white people.
Among them were college presidents, leading scientists and men of letters,
and specialists in many subjects. When the group of jurors to which I was assigned met for
organization, Mr. Thomas Nelson Page, who was one of the number, moved that I be made Secretary of
that division, and the motion was unanimously adopted. Nearly half of our division were
Southern people. In performing my duties in the inspection of the exhibits of white schools,
I was in every case treated with respect, and at the close of our labors I parted from my
associates with regret.
I am often asked to express myself more freely than I do upon the political condition and the
political future of my race. These recollections of my experience in Atlanta give me the opportunity
to do so briefly. My own belief is, although I have never before said so in so many words,
that the time will come when the Negro in the South will be accorded all the political rights
which his ability, character, and material possessions entitle him to. I think, though,
that the opportunity to freely exercise such political rights will not come in any large
degree through outside or artificial forcing, but will be accorded to the Negro by the Southern
white people themselves, and that they will protect him in the exercise of those rights.
Just as soon as the South gets over the old feeling that it is being forced by foreigners
or aliens to do something which it does not want to do, I believe that the change in the
direction that I have indicated is going to begin. In fact, there are indications that it
is already beginning in a slight degree. Let me illustrate my meaning. Suppose that some
months before the opening of the Atlanta Exposition there had been a general demand from the press
and public platform outside the South that a Negro be given a place on the opening program,
and that a Negro be placed upon the board of jurors of a ward. Would any such recognition
of the race have taken place? I do not think so. The Atlanta officials went as far as they did
because they felt it to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, to reward what they considered merit
in the Negro race. Say what we will, there is something in human nature which we cannot blot
out, which makes one man in the end recognize and reward merit in another, regardless of color or
race. I believe it is the duty of the Negro, as the greater part of the race is already doing,
to deport himself modestly in regard to political claims, depending upon the
slow but sure influences that proceed from the possession of property, intelligence,
and high character for the full recognition of his political rights. I think that the
deporting of the full exercise of political rights is going to be a matter of natural
slow growth, not an overnight gourd-vine affair. I do not believe that the Negro should cease
voting, for a man cannot learn the exercise of self-government by ceasing to vote any more
than a boy can learn to swim by keeping out of the water. But I do believe that in his voting
he should more and more be influenced by those of intelligence and character who are his next door
neighbors. I know colored men who, through the encouragement, help, and advice of Southern white
people, have accumulated thousands of dollars worth of property, but who at the same time would
never think of going to those same persons for advice concerning the casting of their ballots.
This, it seems to me, is unwise and unreasonable, and should cease. In saying this I do not mean
that the Negro should treacle, or not vote from principle, for the instant he ceases to vote from
principle he loses the confidence and respect of the Southern white man even. I do not believe that
any state should make a law that permits an ignorant and poverty-stricken white man to vote,
and prevents a black man in the same condition from voting. Such a law is not only unjust,
but it will react, as all unjust laws do, in time, for the effect of such a law is to encourage the
Negro to secure education and property, and at the same time it encourages the white man to remain
in ignorance and poverty. I believe that in time, through the operation of intelligence and friendly
race relations, all cheating at the ballot box in the South will cease. It will become apparent
that the white man who begins by cheating a Negro out of his ballot soon learns to cheat a white man
out of his, and that the man who does this ends his career of dishonesty by the theft of property
or by some equally serious crime. In my opinion, the time will come when the South will encourage
all of its citizens to vote. It will see that it pays better, from every standpoint, to have healthy,
vigorous life, than to have that political stagnation which always results when one half
of the population has no share and no interest in the government. As a rule I believe in universal
free suffrage, but I believe that in the South we are confronted with peculiar conditions that
justify the protection of the ballot in many of the States, for a while at least, either by an
education test, a property test, or by both combined, but whatever tests are required,
they should be made to apply with equal and exact justice to both races.
you